[Music]
when I was invited to talk here
basically Barry invited me to talk about
two different things and so I'm going to
give you two presentations squished into
one so one of which is basically
elements of my work and so my moves
recent project last day of freedom which
I co-directed and produced with Noemi
talisman and then the second thing I'm
going to talk about is the social and
environmental arts Research Center which
I founded in co-direct with Elliott
Anderson who's in the back he can wait
and also Laura Palmer and also I don't
know whether the assistant director is
here Kyle McKinley Lane McKinley so
first I'm going to talk about my own
work a little bit and then I'm going to
switch hats and be the person who works
from UC Santa Cruz so know meet Allison
I've been collaborating since 2004 on
creative projects and we've been looking
at the ways impact individuals are
impacted by bigger systems we always
like to joke obviously as you can hear
I'm from England
she's from Israel we kind of joked that
we both grew up in former social
democracies and so we're still hanging
on to some ideology what it means to
like actually have like health care and
infrastructure and support and so what
we wanted to try to do within these
projects was truly look about the ways
that individuals managed within big
systems and sometimes the fact that when
you vote for something or you support
something you never realize as Bill
Babbitt who's the subject of the film
says it comes back and this comes
knocking at your door
so last spare freedom is an animated
documentary that describes the impact of
the death penalty on whole communities
and we have the opportunity to work with
a nonprofit organization here that
basically works with families of
prisoners on death row and also
represents prisoners on death row and
actually it came out of no mean having a
day job they're doing media work and she
kept coming home and saying oh my god
these are incredible stories and they're
so extreme versions of what we've been
looking at for a long time so we went
back to the organization said can we can
we collaborate with you and imagine that
we were going to do some tiny thing
would be an educational thing for them
and an interactive installation for us
and we ended up making an animated
documentary that was nominated for an
Oscar so first documentary film
took us on budget time so last day of
freedoms the story of one man bill
Babbitt actually just got off the phone
with him he telephoned me just I was
arriving here and his decision to stand
by his brother Manny it was a veteran
returning from war from Vietnam as he
faces criminal charges racism and
ultimately the death penalty so when
bill babbitt's a brother Manny returned
from Vietnam he was homeless and bill
took him in actually took him back to
Sacramento and Bill realized his brother
Manny had committed a crime and
basically Manny had a PTSD flashbacks
broke into an old woman's house who was
watching a war movie he beat her up and
she died of shock so to protect his
family and get Manny the help he needed
bill called the police the police
promised bill that his brother would get
the help he needed
and instead Manny was accused of a
capital crime he was ordered a Purple
Heart on death row and he was executed
on his 50th birthday so we actually
decided to animate the story of Bill who
has lived with the trauma of the
experience of having his brother commit
this crime and then the guilt of having
led to his brother's execution so I just
want to show you a tiny clip so you can
see the kind of work it is it's a it's
32,000 drawings so it's a long process
[Laughter]
the cops told me he's not going to get
the death toll it's not a death penalty
case they really believe that Manny
would not go to death row we had to go
down to well talk to a lawyer I trusted
this lawyer because um
ah he look like one of those lawyers you
see on TV I mean he was tall he was
blond fancy suit on I'm thinking he's
about something he had an office right
on across the street from the County
Courthouse I'm thinking this is cool you
know he's a good word
he told us what the case was he said
they got special circumstances on your
brother then gone for the death penalty
I go what but they put the cops this is
the cop he knew yes this will be no
death tell Metis he'll go to hospital
well the cops did not deliberately lie
to me but when the district attorney got
hold of it she thought otherwise
political season when it's time to pick
the cherries time to pick the oranges
you head for the field
can you stop kicking
and you enrich yourself and that's what
they did with the death penalty when I
asked the lawyer during the course I
said I don't see any blacks being seated
on the jury he told me that he did not
trust he used n-word I guess he must
have figured he could use the [__]
word and feel comfortable just animation
to bring access to new and younger
audiences
and animation all sorts of strange
things it allows to use the distance
from a subject and so we actually have
when we first started them we weren't
animating we started showing parts of
the unedited film to some of my students
and faculty at UC Santa Cruz and they
started overwhelming to watch bill but
that distance of actually allowing that
person to be animated allows you to see
and hear a story and on the other hand
it allows you to have a greater sense of
intimacy so you are as the film goes on
bill is getting closer and closer up
until he really is only the intimacy
that you have with like a lover or a
child and so you're really pulling into
that sense of feeling the sense of
responsibility animation also allowed us
to describe metaphoric states of
isolation and trauma stripped down six
as bill drives to San Quentin to witness
his brother's death so we did things
like actually took that drive to San
Quentin filmed it and then took that
information instead of removing the
sections to kind of create the sense of
psychological kind of trauma that bill
was going through the impact of the film
was exceeded our expectations
last year awarded a Gideon award by the
California Public Defenders Association
and this year we got a congressional
brain trust award from the black
veterans caucus which is from in
connected to Washington DC and bill came
with us to the ceremony which was a
pretty incredible opportunity for us and
also for him so bill wasn't permitted to
tell his story in court this is an
opportunity for him to tell a story and
be heard he got to answer questions but
he wasn't able to tell his version of
what happened so this is the very first
time that he was actually allowed to
tell his entire story most recently the
film was part of the world coalition to
end the death penalty
in Helsinki it was in UCLA at the Mental
Health Forum and a trace forward
conference in Atlanta on race and
reconciliation the crazy thing about
getting nominated for an Oscar is that
it's screened with all the other shorts
so that was actually screened at 192
theatrical releases throughout the US so
all of a sudden it was this incredible
different kind of so for a fine artist
to kind of arrive in a place all the
sudden is like war and get all of these
emails responses from people was quite
remarkable so last year paid and
continuous travel internationally it's
now in high schools and universities
it's in the university collections and
it's being dubbed into Chinese if you
want to watch the film is actually on
Netflix right now so it's till the end
of the year so we were recently ordered
a Guggenheim to produce a second short
film related to this issue and we're
also producing in association with that
an online site which will explore the
deeper issues of racism trauma justice
and safety and go from like you know how
do these things connect how the hell did
this get here how are we in this
situation and what are the larger kind
of infrastructure failures that are
leading us to these bigger questions so
I'm actually working with Simon boys
who's here to I think in some ways you
can wave Simon together and here's one
of a denim grad in the program and if
anybody's interested in collaborating on
data visualization for that site it
would be a great opportunity to here
used to do let us know if there's
anybody who's interested in that one of
the things we wanted to do yet again is
to allow access along ways that perhaps
people might not have seen before oh my
god consider this information so that
not we're not just directly kind of
talking out against the death penalty
which is something I personally didn't
go out with I'm against but actually
just to open up the question of like
bill for example supported the death
penalty until it came knocking his door
so to think about how does this happen
so many of the stories that we've been
interviewing people have educational
issues mental health issues etc so
really looking at those places where all
of these issues are connected I just
wanted to give a quick shout out to
Simon who's doing his own work too so
this is a yes in disguise as a project
he's producing right now which is a
collection of trading cards made from
OkCupid dating profiles of men who've
made misogynistic statements
and this project pushes conversation
about consent beyond the safety of the
screen so Simon's in the back that have
you interested in talking to him about
that so I talked to you about last day
of freedom I'm going to switch into my
other hat so I'm an associate professor
at UC Santa Cruz in the art and digital
art new media departments and just about
a migrated into the film Department to a
couple of years ago and the Dean said
would anybody like to run a research
center at UC Santa Cruz and I said yes
and then I had to go home and Google
what a research center was and so I
understood it to be an opportunity and
for us what it is is the opportunity to
take the resources of the University and
the incredible intellectual capital of
the University and the issues that
surround and connect to UC Santa Cruz
from the fact that it's now the second
most expensive place in the country to
live and really think about that in
relation to creative art projects and
invite artists to come in so it's a
social and environmental arts research
it says we say what's bringing together
artists specialists in the public to
make social and environmental change
through creative work and these are the
people who I collaborate with now we're
and the co directors and an our
associate professor the director so
Elliott Anderson a Lori Palmer who
couldn't be here today
and Kyle amick McKinley and what I
thought I would do in order for you to
see a little bit of what we do with that
is to span a little bit of the kind of
work that we're doing ourselves and also
the kind of what we've invited to do and
and also invite you if you're interested
in the projects we're doing or in
connection to the projects we'd love to
hear from you this is Kyle's work so he
did a project called the objects project
with Jim lips and Kyle himself and so
that notion of this is basically he's a
lecturer and also an associate director
of spark the idea of this is that
identifies objects supposedly mistaken
by the police for weapons he and his
co-author mark the location and then the
incident that occurred and it's a link
to the actual newspaper accounts to the
instance so this is an example of one a
man who's the elastic in his boxer
shorts ran out so actually took his
pants off and put them in his pocket and
then a police officer thought it was a
gun and so he's shot and I was an
investigation into that and I maybe
think about which is totally unrelated
but I'm very inspired by this this new
mobile justice California and
ACLU app has anyone heard of this yeah
so just the notion of that and the
things the possibilities of what could
be happened within a creative context
and also these kind of political context
if you don't know about it basically
it's an app where you can record
instance and send them directly to be
recorded and tabbed and so that that if
you have any of these issues or open so
back to Kyle's work
Kyle's also recently produced this piece
for a blade of grass it's about art
washing between social practice and
social reproduction and he's actually
looking at Boyle Heights the fact that
it's becoming a new arts district
similar to stuff that's happening in San
Francisco in some ways and he makes the
case that the art that was already there
which was the local communities trying
to make a living is actually social
practice and that the community is
reproducing itself so I'm kind of giving
you these examples of our project simply
for you to see from some of the context
of the ways in which we're thinking
about art and politics and culture and a
law professor a Laura Palmer she's an
artist a writer and activist and
co-director of spark and she just
published a book called the aura of the
whole which explores sites of material
extraction it's basically documenting
multiple visits that she made to sites
of industrial extraction in the United
States and she's interested in looking
at the complex and reciprocal
relationships we have between humanity
and the materials we rely upon she's
also doing a project which is not peace
and also writing piece about lichens and
she's interested in the idea of that
lichens themselves a slow resistance
adaptive and collective organism and
that they're anti-capitalist companion
and climate to climate change they
survive climate change and she was
thinking about how we as a group of
humans could actually be inspired by and
look to lichens she also a large at
Parma move just a few of year or so ago
from Chicago Art Institute and then when
she was there she was a founding member
of the Chicago torture justice memorials
a collective of artists activists and
attorneys and former prisoners engage in
art social media and direct action and
they actually recently won a historic
reparations legislation for
african-americans tortured by the
Chicago police so SPARC invited four of
the current and active members to come
to UCSC campus this
going to speak about how they organized
for and won that victory so we're
constantly looking for these ways in
which to to frame experiences allow
students to see different possibilities
but also allow all of us to have these
connections and think a little further
Eliot Anderson is in the back is an
associate professor and also co-director
of spark one of the people who has been
longest in spark with me here this is
his argument reality P silicon monuments
is the documentaries tours explores the
history of Silicon Valley with it what
mented models of historic computers
building sculptures and images and I
know that he also did a Silicon Valley
toxic tour and he collaborated with an
organization there sorry I don't know
what the organization is Erica shouting
out Eliot the Silicon Valley toxics
coalition apologies for that and so back
to spark one of the things we do is we
invite artists to lecture at spark so
I'm just going to include a couple of
recent samples of people who have come
and given what we call brown bag
lectures
they're literally possibilities for
students to bring their lunch and hang
out and and hear a talk and also faculty
so this one is from conflict kitchen
they they're fighting the travel ban
with food serving authentic cuisine from
countries that the United States has
been imposed bans upon whether through
war or economic sanctions most recently
we had a federico i don't know how to
pronounce his last name so anybody in
the audience is to expand my apologies
so he was versus cartel oh cool no he
was born in kilala
in Padua Puebla in Mexico emigrated to
Indiana in 99 and grew up as an
undocumented immigrant there so his work
is primarily concerned with the current
social political and cultural issues
that hispanic immigrants face in the US
and so this is piece is called tiempo
and it's a video and animation that
explores the perception of time from an
immigrants experience and perspective so
aside from the the brown bag lunches
lecture series we also invite a series
of artist fellows to come with us and
that's a two-year invitation so the
first year as I was working out because
we don't have a large amount of funds
but we have a bunch of resources how we
can Co fund with you and have people
come in give a talk work out there's
going to work for us and then the second
years going to be the project so this is
what we did with ultra red who actually
came a couple of times to to work with
us there are sound art collective
engaged with communities for 20 years as
artists organizers and social
researchers I just really like the quote
how many of you know ultra red they were
in the Whitney several years ago and the
words of sound art and modern electronic
music ultra red pursue a fragile but
dynamic exchange between art and
political organizing producing radio
broadcast performances recording
installations texts and public space
actions that directly engage organizing
and analysis of political struggles so
one of the things they did when they
came to us and we don't always have
things books directive connected to our
students but the students were
protesting the fact that the the hike in
you see what it cost of UC education and
so ultra red actually sat with them and
looking at the history and through these
series of listening sessions really talk
to them about this these notions
they were found it was founded in 94 by
two A's access activists and then they
expanded to include artists and
researchers and organizations to engage
in one of their sound listening
experiences that's probably one of most
extraordinary things so they get actual
final sound okay but it's a steep
listening kind of notions it's really
fascinating we will see on projects with
Barbara burnish at art mill she's a
sparks fellow she's also an affiliate
because she has an organization so we
affiliate with sort of fellow
organizations sister organizations and
so she's working on it Oshin
sustainability in collaboration with the
United Nations safe planet campaign and
so she has been working with us looking
at that and doing a lot of work with
plastic pollution Mike Heller Leslie
rule did a project with the beach fight
housing projects in Santa Cruz but one
of the projects I find most amazing
recently that she's done is this
grassroots girl initiative where she
participated with fire light foundation
and Nike Foundation grassroots girls
initiative in Rwanda and Malawi and
she's teaching adolescents girls how to
use video editing and to create three to
five-minute little clips of their own
stories and experiences and then create
public service announcements through
those and teach other people I think
this might be my last one so another
affiliate we have is with math and
organization and virtual resource center
for
created projects that advanced modules
producing art for positive environmental
and social change they're based in
Dallas Texas
and artisan organizers on this website
contribute to the vitality of communica
munities and culture so they have a lot
in common with us just the art mail is
also up there too so this is example of
their resource page so I guess if you're
interested in talking to either of us I
later I or any of the other people
connected we are always interested to
have people come to lectures demos
presentations our two-year fellowship is
actually by invitation but basically by
your interest or suggestions of interest
and the possibilities how we can
fundraise and develop things together
and then finally affiliations with
nonprofit organizations and also
for-profit organizations who are
interested in some of the aims of social
and environmental practice in creative
projects this is our website thanks so
much
[Applause]